So we have this nice demo app in a form that we'll never use again because for the rest of the course
we'll use Angular but still you learned a lot about some of the core Ionic components and most importantly,
where to find more information about the components and how to generally use them and have a look at this
app,
it really looks nice, it really looks beautiful in my opinion and that with very little work from our
side
and this is the power Ionic gives you
and it even gives you the power to of course adjust all these styles if you need to and
we'll do that later in the course as well,
styling and theming is an important topic.
Before we do that, let's dive into a component which works a bit differently than the other components
and which will then also nicely explain why using Angular instead of vanilla Javascript can be more
convenient. Let's say when we enter some invalid data,
for example we leave the fields empty and I click add expense,
we want to show a little alert which warns the user that the entered value is invalid.
Now of course we could throw an alert here, invalid values,
this uses the built-in alert functionality every browser knows.
If we do that, if I reload,
then I get this default alert here at the top
but we can certainly do way better,
how about a native looking-like alert here in the middle of the app? Ionic has us covered,
it does offer components that help us with that but if we have a look at the official components docs,
we do find an alert and we find an ion-alert-controller and an ion-alert.
Now thankfully, you find some instructions on how to use the alert here,
also with vanilla Javascript instead of just Angular
but as you will learn with Angular, it's way more convenient but let's focus on the vanilla Javascript
style for now. To throw such an alert,
first of all in our ion app somewhere, maybe here at the bottom,
you have to add the ion-alert-controller.
Now if you add this element, you'll not see any change on your screen,
if you reload, you don't see that controller here,
it's an invisible element because it doesn't add any visual output,
it adds some functionality we can tap into, we can use. Now to use it though, we need to get access to
the ion-alert-controller,
so in my Javascript code here, I'll add a new constant, alertController or alertCtrl and I will
simply use document query selector to select that ion-alert-controller because even though we can't
see anything on the screen, it of course still is a normal web component,
just one that doesn't really render anything, it just adds some Javascript functionality behind the scenes.
With access to this component,
we can tap into this Javascript functionality. So with the alert controller here where I do my validation,
I can actually call create.
Now this is a method provided by this alert controller component and you can learn about this method
in the official docs of course,
it's not a default HTML method. Create takes a Javascript object because with this method, we create
a new alert
and with this object we can configure this alert and one configuration we can set up is the message
that gets displayed, like please enter a valid reason and amount. Besides a message,
we can also add a header and all these fields you can set can of course be found in the official docs,
though later when we work with Angular, this will also become easier because we then have Typescript
support and we get some help from our IDE.
So for now, I'll just enter this invalid inputs header by knowing that this header field exists and you
just have to trust me for now.
We can also add a buttons array which allows us to label the buttons which are displayed and control
how many buttons are displayed in general and I will add one button which prints
okay.
You can always configure these buttons in more detail and control what they do when they are tapped
but for now, I'll just enter this button which will then as a default always close the alert.
Now create creates a new alert but if you save that and click the button again after reloading, you won't
see anything because it creates that and it does so asynchronously and it does not display it automatically.
Instead to display the created alert,
you have to add then because create actually returns a promise which will fulfill when the creation of
this element is done.
So here as an argument in the function you pass to the then block, you will get an alert element.
This is the element that was created
and it will be that ion-alert-component here.
If you would add this directly to the DOM like this, it would not work as intended,
instead
this is always created for you by the alert controller
but on this alert element, you can then call present to present it on the screen.
So now with this code added, if we go back to the application and reload and I tap this button, we see
this alert here.
Now please also note that here it looks like a typical material design Android alert,
if I go to an iPhone and I reload, that's always important,
you need to reload after switching devices,
if I click add expense, not only do the buttons look different,
the alert style also looks as it should look on iOS. So this is how we can use these special components,
all the components which end with controller in the docs like the actionsheet controller or as you
just saw, the alert controller. But using these controller-like components will get even easier once we add
Angular, then we don't have to place them in the DOM even though we can't see them and access them like
this,
instead we'll be able to inject them but more on that later.